#+TITLE:A Tale of Two Boredoms
* A Tale of Two Boredoms
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: ataleoftwoboredoms
   :END:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Draft: v1.0 | Posted: 2/28/2018 | Updated: 3/1/2018 | confidence of
success: 5% | estimated time to completion: 2/27/2018 | importance: Low
#+END_QUOTE

Something I've found myself unable to articulate well recently has been
the nuance behind a particular kind of boredom I have been feeling. More
specifically, I think that the word "boredom" is a bit too
wide-encompassing for the range of emotions it is supposed to represent,
so I decided to write a little bit about it just so I have something to
link to people in the future.

In short, I think there are two types of boredom, which I will call
"Type 1 Boredom" and "Type 2 Boredom". Type 1 Boredom is a "foreground"
state, in which you do not know what to do. Type 2 Boredom, on the
flipside, is a "background" state, in which you are actively playing a
part in something boring. Both of these problems involve very different
solution spaces, and they /feel/ very different, but are nonetheless all
thrown under the same umbrella of boredom as if they represented the
same idea.

** Type 1 Boredom
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: type1boredom
    :END:

Type 1 Boredom describes a state of mind in which you are doing nothing,
and cannot think of something to do. This is a more spacey, aloof sort
of feeling, and a very common way people tend to deal with this type of
boredom is by endlessly surfing social media until they are forced to do
something else.

Type 1 Boredom is the boredom everybody associates with the word
"boredom", and also the type of boredom that always has the easiest
solutions. I frequently see "how to stop being bored" type posts on most
run-of-the-mill productivity blogs and most of them go something like
the following:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  *15 COOL WAYS TO BEAT BOREDOM (#4 WILL BLOW YOUR MIND)*

  1: DO SOME PUSH UPS

  [attached is a gif of wonder woman doing pushups]

  2: READ A GOOD BOOK

  [attached is an image of a cat that looks like it is reading a book]
#+END_QUOTE

so on and so forth.

I think this sort of advice is unhelpful because type 1 boredom isn't
really about knowing literally nothing that would be interesting to you
(I sincerely doubt almost anybody reading a list of "things to do when
you are bored" could not have easily written down a similar "things I
could be doing right now" list in 25 seconds). Type 1 boredom is mostly,
in my view, a symptom of poor capturing.

Put another way, I think most people are perfectly capable of filling
virtually all of their time with things that they uniquely find to be
interesting, but often fall prey to type 1 boredom simply because they
cannot decide what best to do. You could call this a type of
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analysis_paralysis][analysis
paralysis]], but I think the particulars of it is a little different -
type 1 boredom rears its head most frequently when you do not have a
strong grasp of the list of things you want to do, and your mind goes
blank since you can't even begin to narrow the solution space to a
tangible list (I.e. the difference between "tell me a cool fact" and
"tell me the capital of Mali"). An oft-cited anecdote from /Zen and the
Art of Motorcycle Maintenance/ is the bit where a girl in the narrator's
writing class, completely stumped on how to write an essay on Main
Street of their town, is able to write freely once he instructs her to
write about one brick in one building on the street. The difficult part
isn't coming up with answers from a solution space - it's coming up with
a solution space.

To make an analogy, imagine you are on a date, and you are trying to
decide where you want to go.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  You: "Where do you wanna go?"

  Date: "I dunno, where do you wanna go?"

  You: "Hmm, I dunno, what are you in the mood for?"

  Date: "uhh, maybe pizza?"

  You: "Nah, we had pizza last week, let's do something different"

  Date: "So, what do you wanna go eat?"

  You: "I dunno..."
#+END_QUOTE

The problem in this situation isn't that you /literally/ cannot think of
places that you can eat, even though most of the "solutions" offered by
"how not to be bored" articles treat the problem this way. For example,
you wouldn't write an article titled "how to decide what kind of food to
get on a date" in which "option 1" is just "go to the nearest Chinese
food restaurant". You read that and think "well of course I could go
there", and some people might bookmark your article and regularly
consult it when they can't decide where to go, but the methodology is
all wrong. It's not actually a solution to the problem, it's just a list
of cached answers.

This is a problem with a bunch of small solutions, and the best way to
do this is to just write things down so you don't forget what you want
to do. People do this sort of thing in different ways, but organizing
yourself so that you have a humongous queue of cool things to do is such
a worthwhile task that I think it's worth saying even if it sounds
overly simple.

The nice thing about writing things down is that it's not limited to any
particular hobby or field. If you are into books, you can keep an
account on
[[https://www.goodreads.com/user/show/25277520-eryk-banatt][Goodreads]]
and mark a book "to read" if you ever encounter a book you plan on
reading. If you like anime, you can keep an account on
[[https://myanimelist.net/animelist/ambisinister][MyAnimeList]]. There's
websites for tons of these type of things, and if there isn't then you
can just use a spreadsheet or a text document somewhere (I often use
[[https://evernote.com/][evernote]] and [[file:docs.google.com][google
docs]]). If you want to keep track of your projects, invest a few
quarters into a stack of post-it notes and put one on your wall behind
your desk whenever you think of a new project. Want to measure your
progress? Purchase a jar, and when you complete a project put the
post-it note into the jar when you complete it. This isn't exactly
rocket science, you just have to have easily accessible, visible lists
of things to do.

[[../images/misc/jar.JPG]]

To continue our dinner date analogy, you can imagine writing down the
name of a restaurant every time you and your date pass a restaurant and
think "oh we should go here one day". Then when you need to select a
place to eat, you can pick one literally at random. If you're not
feeling it, you can pick another one at random, repeating until you find
one you like. This "problem" is so non-existent that it ceases to be a
problem, because you're offloading the task of generating the initial
list of possibilities to the outside world.

It's the easy boredom.

** Type 2 Boredom
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: type2boredom
    :END:

Type 2 boredom is, by far, the most difficult type of boredom; it's a
type of boredom that reaches far beyond the present moment. This sort of
boredom is a systemic, deeply rooted ennui that follows you around when
you are actively doing something and /still/ feel bored. If type 1
boredom is the toe-stubbing pain of boredom, type 2 boredom is the
lingering miasma after a particularly violent breakup.

In short, it's when you're bored and you can't consult buzzfeed to
figure out how to not be bored.

I am of the opinion that this is simultaneously the most troubling type
of boredom, as well as the most important to notice. It's not too hard
to notice easy, type 1 boredoms, partially because they are acute and
usually rather fleeting (man, folding laundry sucks). Type 2 boredom is
by nature chronic and systematic, and those things are generally much
harder to notice (compare this to Sleep Apnea, which affects
[[http://www.sleep-journal.com/article/S1389-9457(08)00307-9/abstract][20% of the population despite 90% being undiagnosed]], and
[[http://journal.chestnet.org/article/S0012-3692(16)39896-8/abstract][significantly
increases your mortality rate]]). It takes a great deal of introspection
to be able to assess your current circumstances and conclude "I find my
job / major / hobby deeply boring", or even worse "I find my life
boring". Even if you are capable of doing so, it takes a great deal of
initiative to even begin tackling such a problem. That said, it is a
worthy goal; most people are
[[https://www.gwern.net/docs/psychology/2016-levitt.pdf][overly
cautious]] when faced with making large decisions, even though making
these decisions makes you much happier on average.

Eliezer Yudkowsky, in /[[http://www.hpmor.com/][Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality]]/, writes on a great mental habit where when you
feel confused about something, you commit your confusion to conscious
thought, rendering you unable to convince yourself that you understand.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  He could have avoided every single one of his mistakes if he'd just
  applied the things Harry had already told him -

  Draco said out loud, "I notice that I am confused."

  /Your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused by
  fiction than by reality.../

  Draco was confused.

  Therefore, something he believed was fiction.

  Granger should not have been able to do all that.

  Therefore, she probably hadn't.
#+END_QUOTE

And a variation of this that I've been implementing for a while is the
idea of /noticing when you are bored/. Committing all of your boredom to
conscious thought allows for two (in my view, very good) things:

1. Demonstrates exactly how high a proportion of your time you spend
   bored
2. Makes it more difficult to ignore type 2 boredom, makes complacency
   more costly

** Conclusion
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: conclusion
    :END:

I don't quite have all the experience in the world with defeating all
types of boredom (I spend a bit too much headspace in type 2 boredom for
my own liking), but I've made it a personal mission of mine to delete as
much of it from my life as possible.

Every type 1 bored feeling is either a failure or a transitory state,
every type 2 bored feeling is a dissatisfaction to be eliminated.
Identifying and naming the problem is the first step towards solving
them, and this short blog-type post, however small, is a step towards
reaching this goal.

/posted on 2/28/18/\\
