#+TITLE: Kadano Controller Review
* Review - Kadano's Modded Controllers
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: review---kadanos-modded-controllers
   :END:

I recently purchased a
[[http://smashboards.com/threads/kadanos-controller-mods-consistent-shield-drops-hybrid-gate-more-list-with-details-and-prices.421137/][custom
modded controller courtesy of Kadano]]. These things caused quite a stir
in the community when Kadano announced he was making them, and I had
been looking to purchase another controller anyways, so I took the
plunge and bought one.

Specifically, I purchased the following:

2008 Japan White Controller, Used

-  Sung Method Shield Drop Notches
-  Hybrid gate, all octants, shallow
-  Exchanged C stick and analog stick springs
-  Elevated Trigger Point (both L and R, ~75%)
-  Reduced click resistance (L and R, ~50%)
-  Lubrication (L and R inner tubes, Analog stick for snapback removal)

[[../images/kadano/controller.png]]

This ran me about $150 (I had to save up for this!)

So there's a lot to go over, but I'll be providing extensive thoughts on
each of these elements. I'd like to consider myself
[[https://gfycat.com/UnsteadyCriminalAmericanbobtail][more technical
than average]], and I've done many of these modifications myself on
controllers for my own use and for others (Slox, Bolt, and Fission, to
name a few) who all gave me very positive feedback. As such, I feel that
I have a leg to stand on both in describing the effects of the mods as
well as the craftsmanship.

So let's begin:

** "Unboxing"
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: unboxing
    :END:

It took a very, very long time to get this controller from the time of
order. I ordered this controller on November 16, 2015 (I was controller
#55) and received it on June 18, 2016 (7 months, 2 days). I don't
particularly blame Kadano for this since he had a huge backlog and this
controller was a bit of a large project. Once he began working on it,
though, it didn't take too much time for it to be completed.

I was pretty impressed by most of the shipping process / packaging. I
was provided with package tracking (certainly a godsend for an
international purchase) and it arrived at my house in New Jersey from
Vienna in 9 days, which I'm satisfied with.

The box was a bit banged up when it arrived on my doorstep, which was a
little worrisome, but Kadano packed this thing with so much bubble wrap
that I'm confident it could have been thrown from a building and still
perform the same. After opening it and digging through the wrap, I saw
that the box contained the controller (cables tied, no visible
scratches) and a small printout: a description of what I ordered, the
values for each notch, information on the controller's loose zone, and a
detailed explanation on what everything meant.

[[../images/kadano/infosheet.png]]

** Hybrid Gate
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: hybrid-gate
    :END:

Definitely the most drastic change to the controller, and easily the
most difficult to do - it's probably the only mod on this controller
that would not be wise to perform yourself unless you consider yourself
very skilled at this type of work.

[[../images/kadano/hybridgate.png]]

I selected the shallow version of the mod because I use a lot of “roll”
inputs in my play (moonwalks, run cancels, cactuar dashes, shield drops,
etc.) I didn't want to struggle to reprogram my muscle memory for these
things (especially shield dropping, which a huge part of my game is
based upon), so I specifically asked for shallower notches than normal.

As advertised, these notches are shallow - very very shallow, almost to
the point where I'm a bit worried that they'll wear away after a few
years use. (Perhaps it's optimistic of me to think the controller will
live long enough to wear down the notches, but I made this purchase
because I figured the cost per use would be astronomically low. That
said, I will update this in a year or so with whether or not my concerns
were unfounded). It feels different, and weirded me out a little at
first. That said, the shallow notches were definitely the right pick for
me - roll inputs still feel more or less the exact same (albeit with
slightly different tactile feedback) and for the most part it felt like
playing on any other controller, which is what I wanted out of the
shallowness.

Hybrid gate takes a little getting used to, at least with the shallow
octants. The notches don't put up much of a fight when you roll into
them, so it's easy to roll past them when trying to input an angle. They
don't magically make you good at the angles, but what they do /really/
well is provide a tactile cue for angles that are normally ambiguous to
hit on normal controllers, which provides a form of
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motor_control][feedback]], which makes
learning the actual angles easier. Hitting the difficult firefox angles
or long wavedashes are obviously a bit easier on this controller, but
the reason I opted for this mod in the first place wasn't to make these
angles easier, but to make /learning/ them easier and to add a little
consistency (think less “automatic” and more “training wheels”). I
obviously can't say much about controllers with the deeper notches (I
could see those being “easy mode” controllers, but I have no real frame
of reference) but Hybrid gate with the shallow notches gave me what I
wanted out of this mod without any of the potential negatives I had
imagined the deeper notches would bring.

The craftsmanship on this particular modification is quite good -
certainly living up to Kadano's reputation as an expert modder.
Visually, it's pretty impressive - it looks pretty natural and you
probably wouldn't be able to tell it was notched unless you held it in
your hands yourself. Rolling the stick around in a circle produces
subtle but noticeable “bumps” at each of the notches, and all of the
notches hit close to the optimal values (the sheet details
the notch values and almost all of them are centered at 25).

There /are/ two things I wasn't satisfied with. The first is that the
West-southwest notch was a bit too small for my tastes - it seemed to be
notched at a slightly gentler angle than the others which made it the
most inconsistent of the notches. The second, related issue is that the
notches are not all quite the same size. Some were a little larger than
others and you can really tell that they're handmade, which was a bit
distracting when I was trying to get used to it. These are both very
minor qualms (obviously very easy to ignore after playing with it for a
while), and I certainly couldn't imagine another modder doing a better
job without some way of manufacturing the shells themselves.

[[../images/kadano/smallnotch.png]]

There's some cool tricks you can get out of the angles on this
controller aside from your typical mangle/perfect WD.

-  The smallest upwards angle will allow you to
   [[https://gfycat.com/GentleIdolizedFinwhale][grab ledge as fox]]
-  The highest downwards angle will allow you to
   [[https://gfycat.com/ImportantFavoriteBarbet][not bounce if
   firefoxing from air -> ground]]
-  The highest nonvertical angles will let you
   [[https://gfycat.com/HospitableEllipticalFirecrest][hug the ceiling
   of battlefield]] and grab the ledge, making saving yourself a bit
   more consistent

Pretty cool.

Overall Hybrid Gate was a little weird and took some getting used to,
but I was pretty happy with it and it did what I was hoping it would do.

** Sung Notches
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: sung-notches
    :END:

Not much to say with these - they both work perfectly. Not having a
controller that can shield drop at the notches is a blunder (it's
virtually 100% controller dependent) and you can
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VUq17FNSucw][learn to do it yourself]]
or you can pay Kadano $10 to do it, which felt pricey at first but in
hindsight is pretty reasonable.

The finish on these notches are very well crafted and nearly
undetectable unless you've done lots of notching yourself and look very,
very closely. Actually performing this mod is not all that difficult
(especially now that 20XX 4.0 has a
[[https://s3.amazonaws.com/planetbanatt.net/images/kadano/liveinputs.png?X-Amz-Date=20160623T220200Z&X-Amz-Expires=300&X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Signature=110508747df5423fef3bb8c8176cad8205043a0ff183c11cb4ca37123f146757&X-Amz-Credential=ASIAJRA3FBJOFEM5PF5Q/20160623/us-east-1/s3/aws4_request&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=Host&x-amz-security-token=FQoDYXdzEGcaDOKNGymctLeveA9d1CLHAUfNqjkL0ayVlDt7t8eN5xEmapk9siWysz23OhB8pSLinKeZFNw5CxoaV2hshZ9XeTWUqfzXNmHPyUwGgIS/GpemybchVgX9oqC/ZCwnKe3W8uvI9RDQu%2Bu/uSe2bTKPpxloDL0tl2CNrZsbRtxKPdMn9B896QrPF9VW3U1hkaRLHF2WPXB078/H9sN/a8ysBOiSUWiMBwYGC%2B4RpRTISVmR5kEa6hgTm6vzSW2XOP2sgK%2B1WMRHLkpugoVzDg4pAfFLmRrgJKEow7ixuwU%3D][live
analog input display]] in the debug menu under extras) but these have
the added bonus of looking as clean as, well, a completely normal
controller's notches.

There's no excuse to not know shield dropping in 2016 and there's no
reason to not have a controller that can't shield drop in both
directions.

** Analog stick
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: analog-stick
    :END:

The two modifications performed on the stickbox itself were snapback
removal and spring replacement.

The
[[http://smashboards.com/threads/technical-knowledge-compilation-gamecubes-controllers-tvs-recording.335040/][spring
replacement]] was interesting, and another one that I wasn't using on my
current controller at the time (although I had done this mod on other
controllers and used them a bit). It's a very different feel, and pretty
easy to move around with. Although it's very noticeable (I expect any
casual player would be able to detect the difference in a blind test) I
don't think the effect on gameplay is that drastic. The best way I can
describe it is that it makes the analog stick feel “softer” and that it
makes fast analog stick movements require a bit less force. The big
reason for this mod is to make backdashing a little easier. Getting
fairly consistent backdash inputs is doable on any controller, but
generally involves a
[[http://www.meleeitonme.com/back-dashes-smash-turns/#inserted5592][harsh
smash input]]. Since swapping out the spring reduces the force necessary
for an analog input, it requires less force to move the stick fast
(although you're still at the mercy of the game's
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x2hu5ZEuzcc][literally random]]
polling timer). If you struggle with backdashes then this is probably
worth getting, but if you don't then it's not the end of the world if
you don't.

The snapback removal was generously added for free, and it seems like it
did what it was intended to do. Lasering on this controller seems pretty
good (I tried both fox and falco) and although I still got the
occasional reversed laser it felt like a significantly above average
controller (I would expect my falco player friends would have no
problems using this). My only hesitation with reviewing this is that I
didn't know how good or bad this controller was before the mod - I wish
I could have tried it beforehand to see what kind of difference it made.
But, as it stands, there doesn't seem to be much snapback on this
controller, so hooray!

<<triggers>>
** Triggers
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: triggers
    :END:

I'm lumping all of these together because I want to make a blanket
claim.

[[../images/kadano/triggerd.png]]

I personally think that the trigger configuration on this controller is
a straight upgrade compared to standard triggers. Coupled with the fact
that this mod is
[[http://smashboards.com/threads/technical-knowledge-compilation-gamecubes-controllers-tvs-recording.335040/page-5#post-19964088][extremely
easy]] to
[[http://smashboards.com/threads/technical-knowledge-compilation-gamecubes-controllers-tvs-recording.335040/page-6#post-20524561][perform
yourself]] and very inexpensive at that, I think many players would
benefit from at least considering making the switch.

To understand this, it's necessary to talk a bit about
[[http://smashboards.com/threads/official-ask-anyone-frame-things-thread.313889/page-17#post-18512581][powershield
mechanics.]]

The problem with frame perfect analog inputs is that, depending on the
timing of the game's polling, it could randomly "snapshot" your input
halfway between unpressed and pressed. This is the same reason
[[http://www.meleeitonme.com/back-dashes-smash-turns/][dashing back]] is
so hard - if you do the input perfectly, sometimes it will still miss
because the game checked your analog stick in the middle of your dash
input and you'll get a tilt turn anyways.

Shielding is the same - if the game checks your triggers halfway between
being unpressed and reaching the digital press, you won't get the input
you want.

This by itself isn't such a big deal - you would think that the game
checking your shield early would just prevent a powershield, which isn't
the worst thing in the world, right? You'd still get a lightshield and
the negligible extra hitstun / missed powershield aren't really the most
terrible possible results.

The problem is that the engine “generously” allows you to still
powershield if you're in lightshield for only 1 frame and then
immediately reach the digital press on frame 2. This would've solved the
previously mentioned problem, but for some reason you're actually
completely vulnerable to non-projectile attacks for the first two frames
of powershield.

[[../images/kadano/powershield.png]]

In effect, *if you're a little slow on your shield input then you're
essentially not shielding for two frames*. This is bad!

This mod is very easy to perform yourself and lets you retain all the
things you would need triggers for in the first place. You can still L
cancel with lightpress / lightshield on both triggers. You can still
tech / wavedash / shield / powershield / zps / whatever. It's also
easier on your hands (more specifically: if you have longer fingers then
elevating the triggers prevents “pinching”, whereas shorter fingers
would prefer [[http://imgur.com/a/yLTA4][depressed triggers]] instead,
preventing “stretching”) and decreases the distance to the digital
press, which makes powershielding slightly easier and avoids the
Analog->Digital shield transition. Depending on the player, springless /
no lightshield triggers might suit your style better, but compared to
vanilla triggers I can't think of a single downside.

** Overall
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: overall
    :END:

At the end of the day I'm satisfied with this purchase - it's not a
cheap controller but it's certainly a good one and I'm happy I bought
it.

The takeaway from this review is that these controllers aren't
outrageous or broken. If you compare this controller to a "perfect"
unmodded controller (shield drop at both notches, low analog stick
resistance, triggers that don't stick, etc), this controller isn't even
really a huge upgrade, and I'd consider the distance between a third
party controller and a vanilla controller to be much greater than the
distance between a vanilla controller and a Kadano controller. Players
seeking to buy a Kadano controller because they want to instantly become
better at Melee would probably be better suited purchasing lessons, and
players decrying Kadano for selling “cheater controllers” should realize
that almost anything in this controller (except, perhaps, Hybrid Gate) 
could be done yourself for $11 and a free afternoon.

Basically, you can think about controllers like this in one of two ways.
You could compare it to a [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LZR_Racer][LZR
Racer Swimsuit]], which was banned from competitive swimming for being
“technological doping,” or you could compare it to a
[[http://www.tennis-warehouse.com/Wilson_Pro_Staff_RF97_Autograph/descpageRCWILSON-PS97RF.html?from=this][Tennis
Racquet used by a top ATP player]], which are standard even though
they're expensive and specifically built to be good at certain things.

It basically boils down to this: is this controller going to be the
reason you win a match? LZR Racers were banned on the ruling that
Swimming ought to be be "based on the physical performance of the
athlete," and after dozens of world records were broken FINA judged that
the athletes were winning /because/ of the suits, not simply "swimming
well" because of them. This sets them apart from extensive tennis
rackets because tennis rackets don't augment or define your actual play - they just let you do what you're trying to do. Since a lot of these
controller mods are more what I'd consider “basic controller care”
rather than “physical input augmenter” I'm inclined to compare it to the
latter, although that opinion could change if Kadano follows through
with his [[https://twitter.com/Kadano/status/744283082396680192][button
remapping]] idea.

The cost of these controllers is frequently criticized, but I don't
think that expensive peripherals are necessarily bad for a community
(Melee is pretty inexpensive as it is, compared to the cost of a gaming
rig for almost any other esport, or equipment for almost any sport).
Like I mentioned earlier, $150 for something you use every day for a few
years is really not that bad if you consider cost-per-use.

Overall, Kadano makes a fantastic product and I highly recommend it if
you're looking for a bit of extra insurance that your next controller is
a good one.

/posted on 6/23/16/\\
