#+TITLE: Omron Scales
* How Variable are Omron Scales?
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: howvariableareomronscales
  :END:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Draft: v0.66.0 | Posted: 7/8/2017 | Updated: 7/15/2018 | confidence of success: 75% | estimated time to completion: December 2017 | importance: Low
#+END_QUOTE

** Abstract
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: abstract
   :END:

I measure myself with an Omron body composition scale roughly every
30-60 minutes or so across two days, seeing how my weight fluctuates
throughout the day, after meals and exercise, etc. I cross-referenced
this with the other variables this scale tracks (body-fat percentage,
Visceral Fat, and Skeltal Muscle) to see if these variables were
valuable or meaningful, or if paying attention to them would be
misleading. I found that a commonly-held criticism of the scale - that
water weight caused large fluctuations in bodyfat measurement - was
difficult to reproduce, and that the scale seemed to be relatively
consistent despite fluctuations of roughly 2% in either direction. That
is to say, water intake had very little affect on actual water retention
as measured by the scale. Remaining to be done is repeated trials at
substantially different body compositions.

** Intro
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: intro
   :END:

I'm working on a data-driven approach to my own personal health, and
something I thought could potentially be valuable was a simple
body-composition scale. I figured it would be somewhat more information
than
[[https://www.amazon.com/AccuFitness-AM99-Accu-Measure-Body-Caliper/dp/B000QURRUK][fat
calipers]], as well as being more consistent and easy to use. I was
worried about the apparent fluctuation that some of the more negative
reviews complained about, with the claim being that increased water
intake drastically affects the bodyfat percentage measurement. After
considering that I track my food and water intake very closely, I
figured I might be able to remedy this with some spreadsheet magic and a
lot of free time.

The goal here was to determine how variable the body composition
measurements were, how they change with water intake over time, and how
seriously (if at all) I should consider those data points. I did this by
measuring myself roughly every thirty minutes to an hour, and recording
what/when I ate/drank as well as what I was doing. I did this for two
days to collect data points, then threw all the data in excel to
visualize it. I was hoping for a function that I could input the times I
drank water, along with how much, in order to adjust what measurement I
was given. I also harbored suspicion that such a correlation might not
exist at all (i.e. a possible mass case of "the scale is definitely
lying to me"), so this was also partially meant to test this claim.

** Pilot Results (160lbs, July 2017)
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: pilotresults160lbsjuly2017
   :END:

After taking 18 measurements on the first day, I found almost no
correlations between any of the data points - Weight and Bodyfat
Percentage seemed completely uncorrelated (p=0.35), although skeletal
muscle and bodyfat percentage were extremely correlated (p=6.75e-14)
which suggests to me that the scale performs some kind of calculation on
the same measurement to return both values. To test this, I took a few
measurements while wearing a backpack with some weight in it (~10lbs and
~20lbs), which averaged around 23% and 27% bodyfat, respectively.
(sidenote: putting those backpacks on and seeing numbers that I actually
weighed only a few months ago was extremely disorienting!). Given the
numbers from my normal day (means of .19 and 160 = 30.4lbs fat) and
these new numbers (.23*170=39.1; .27*180=48.6) it was basically
suggesting that all this added weight was fat. This gave me some
confidence that the scale was indeed measuring /something/, and was
probably calculating bodyfat percentage by process of elimination (i.e.
everything not X is fat, therefore you are Y% bodyfat).

Curiously, throughout the day I was unable to demonstrate a correlation
between my normal water intake and bodyfat percentage. I tried using
"amount of water consumed since last measurement", "difference in water
since last measurement", and "total water change since beginning of day"
(for which I even used a
[[http://www.triharder.com/thm_swrate.aspx][sweating calculator]] to
account for water lost during a run). The lowest p-value I got was 0.24,
which is certainly not very significant. I did, however, note an outlier
immediately after running (19% -> 15%) which shot back up after taking a
shower (10 minutes later, 15% -> 17%). I tried getting my hands wet and
using it to see if it would mess with the measurement (it didn't), and I
took 6 measurements directly in a row to see if it would fluctuate that
low, which it didn't (min: 18.4, max: 20.1; notably this range only
excludes 5 data points from measuring 18 times throughout the entire day - the scale might just have an accuracy of +/- 2%).

So, I thought of a few scenarios in which running might have caused an
outlier like this:

-  Water /does/ change the scale result, but only at more extreme
   quantities
-  Running depleted something in my body like glycogen, which was
   replenished because I had cereal for breakfast (note: almost
   certainly not fat, since an optimistic 300ish calories from a 30
   minute run should burn a max of 0.08 lbs of fat given the common
   handwavey estimate of 3500 calories per pound of fat)

   -  In this case, it would be repeatable the next time I went for a
      run. When I tested this, I did the same sequence and saw my
      bodyfat measurement drop to 16%, so I suspect that this might be a
      good part of it.

So, the next day I deliberately didn't eat any food or drink any water
for most of the day, then ate a great deal and drank a lot of water in a
really short window. The hope with this was to get somewhat dehydrated,
then /very/ hydrated to see if the change in weight would affect
anything. I ended up eating 467g of food (my entire food intake for a
day) and drinking 48 fl oz of water (which weighs 1422g) for a total
change of about 4 lbs (it was very uncomfortable, especially given how
small my meals had been for the months before this). My scale weight
changed exactly 4 lbs before and after (158.8 -> 162.8), and my bodyfat
percentage didn't really change (and actually went down compared to
immediately before eating, although both were well within the normal
fluctuation for the day at 21.9 -> 21.6). Notably, the visceral fat
measurement was bumped up to 6 despite being 5 the previous 25
measurements. My weight fluctuated pretty wildly after eating (-> 164.4
-> 162.2) but my body fat percentage remained between the same range the
entire time.

The mean values for each day's body fat measurement were 19.2 and 20.4,
respectively. Below is a histogram of results aggregated from both days,
which is close enough to normal given the relatively small sample size.

[[../images/health/omron_hist.png]]

And below are the percent deviations of each point from the overall
mean, and histograms of each measure's percent deviations (omitted is
visceral fat, which was overwhelmingly consistent to the point of not
needing a histogram). From this you can gather that the measurements are
mostly consistent, and usually fall upon a relatively normal
distribution. If you assume that the mean value is somewhat accurate,
you can assume that this scale will return an accurate value most of the
time, and if you take enough points of data (i.e. measuring each day for
a long period of time) then the noise generated from outliers will
likely be filtered out.

[[../images/health/omron_dev.png]] [[../images/health/omron_whist.png]]
[[../images/health/omron_bhist.png]]
[[../images/health/omron_mhist.png]]

Overall, the bodyfat composition measurement and my water
intake/expenditure seem to have very little, if any, correlation between
them. The bodyfat percentage measurement as well as the other
measurements on this scale seem to be relatively consistent, albeit
fluctuating across a 3-4%ish range.

** Secondary Results (148lbs, August 28, 2017)
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: secondaryresultsaugust282017
   :END:

After reaching my weight goal I maintained weight for a bit, then
retested the scale. Results are as follows.

[[../images/health/omron_whist_2.png]]
[[../images/health/omron_bhist_2.png]]
[[../images/health/omron_mhist_2.png]]

Visceral fat was 4 for every measurement, a change of 1. It seems the
scale is suggesting the following changes since last measurement:

-  Weight 160 lbs -> 148 lbs
-  Bodyfat 19.5% -> 17.7%
-  Skeletal Muscle 40.5% -> 40.5%

Meaning I preserved a good amount of muscle and lost mostly fat. Hooray!

** Tertiary Results (160 lbs, July 2018)

Quite a long while later, I made my way up to 160 lbs again. It took a while longer than I originally intended, as I moved, got a job, etc. which took a lot of the time I had to spend on diligent tracking. That said, since the last update on this page I have developed an interest in bouldering, and have slowly made my way back up to this weight I used to be at. 

Here are some hastily thrown together histograms - I only took 9 measurements so I didn't bother making them look super polished, especially since all I really needed was to compare last year to this year. 

[[../images/health/omron_w_final.png]]
[[../images/health/omron_bf_final.png]]
[[../images/health/omron_m_final.png]]

Suggesting the final, ultimate results

-  Weight 160 lbs -> 148 lbs -> 160lbs
-  Bodyfat 19.5% -> 17.7% -> 17.6%
-  Skeletal Muscle 40.5% -> 40.5% -> 41.6%

** Thoughts
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: thoughts
   :END:
/Thoughts before project completion/

So far, This scale seems to provide a tentatively accurate measure of a
number of different variables, and I'm excited to track how they change
as the composition of my body adjusts. I think the variation in the
measurements is negligible enough to be useful enough for looking at
trends. So far, I've only measured "local" weight changes, so I'm only
assigning a ~75% confidence that these data points are valuable at
different body compositions.

Interesting to note, on a separate tangent, that my weight fluctuated a
range of 2.6 lbs during a single day (not including my 4lb binge), which
will be a useful figure for analyzing trends in my weight over longer
time periods.

/Thoughts post-project completion/

I am fairly happy with how this concluded, despite the fact that it took much, much longer than I originally intended and I took a rather roundabout path to get there. I would recommend this scale to anybody seeking more data on their body composition, and I'm very happy with the purchase. Furthermore - this is very motivating! I am the same weight as I was a year ago but the way my body is actually made up is so different and it feels great. I'm hoping to just get into even better shape as time goes on, so this was a pretty cool milestone to observe.

** Still left to do
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: stilllefttodo
   :END:

This section is mostly outmoded, as I have pretty much completed this. I may get a more accurate measurement in the future but I have successfully tested "this thing is actually measuring something" to a satisfactory degree.

I won't have a very high degree of confidence until I perform these more
rigorous all-day tests at least +two more times+ +one more time+ zero more times at very a
different body composition, and see how they compare to these results.
Current plans are:

-  +Lose 10 pounds, predicted measurement of lower than 16% bodyfat+ /in hindsight this was a little ridiculous, given that I was something like 20.5% bodyfat at 160 lbs, would require the 10 pounds I lost to be something like 80% bodyfat (32ish lbs -> 24 lbs bodyfat), which is highly unlikely given that a good portion of what makes up lean body mass is water, which would surely be lost at lower bodyweight no matter how slowly I went./
-  +Gain 10 pounds, while resistance training, predicted measurement of lower than 19% bodyfat+, confidence 65% /updated: given ~18% at 150 = 27 lbs fat, the threshold for >19% at 160lbs is 30.4lbs, making this a roughly 70/30 estimate./
-  Maybe get a more accurate bodyfat measurement
   ([[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_displacement_plethysmography][Bodpod]],
   [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrostatic_weighing][hydrostatic]],
   etc) to assess accuracy rather than just self-consistency.

+I'm guessing I'll be able to test at 150 pounds around mid-august (75%
confidence), so I'll update this document when I get there.+ /judged
correct August 8 2017/

+Next is gaining 10 lbs, which I imagine should be completed by late october (70% confidence).+ /judged incorrect July 15 2018/

/posted on 7/8/2017/\\
