#+TITLE: Zen in the Art of Ping Pong The Animation
* Zen in the Art of Ping Pong The Animation

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
draft: v1.1 | posted: 5/2/2017 | modified: 5/6/2017 | confidence of
success: 75% | estimated time to completion: December 31, 2017 |
importance: Medium
#+END_QUOTE

Something that I've always found appealing about Ping Pong The Animation
is how profoundly well-crafted it is, and how much it captures per unit
time. It seems like almost every line has some meaning; as if every
word, sound, and shot culminates in a
[[http://www.massey.ac.nz/massey/fms/Colleges/College%20of%20Humanities%20and%20Social%20Sciences/EMS/Readings/139.105/Additional/The%20Importance%20of%20the%20Single%20Effect%20in%20a%20Prose%20Tale%20-%20Edgar%20Allan%20Poe.pdf][single
effect]]. Ping Pong is nothing if not utterly deliberate, from it's
character design (Yurie is used to show Kazama's shirking of both his
family and his love life) to it's art style (the abstract style allows
for more [[../images/ppta/scarydragon.png][dramatic exaggeration]]
without breaking the immersion).

Ping Pong the Animation, I think, may be one of the best mediums
published in the last decade for understanding Zen Philosophy. This
writeup assumes that you have already seen Ping Pong, and will talk
about some basics of Zen as well as exploring the characters in Ping
Pong and what they have to add.

I can't help but think that Ping Pong has more nuance to it than certain
communities give it credit for - I often hear people say things like
"I'm totally Peco," and otherwise latching onto specific characters'
narratives in some way. This, I think, misses a lot of the reason why
Ping Pong is so interesting, and sidesteps a great deal of the tangible,
learnable things that can be taken away from this story.

** Zen
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: zen
   :END:

*** On the Limits of Language: Becoming Purposeless, On Purpose
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: on-the-limits-of-language-becoming-purposeless-on-purpose
     :END:

One of the most difficult points to grasp about Zen is this idea of "not
thinking." People often confuse this idea with "autopilot" but I think
that a more accurate way to describe this idea would be "without
language."

Picture the following -- you are Peco, and you are playing a table
tennis match against Kazama. He hits the ball crosscourt, and you think
"he hit the ball crosscourt, so I'm going to return the ball down the
line." Having made this decision, you begin your swing, confusing
everybody in the crowd, since the ball is 6 meters behind you by the
time you finish this thought.

As a fun exercise, try reading aloud the sentence "he hit the ball
crosscourt, so I'm going to return the ball down the line" to yourself,
as fast as you can. Think about how much time it takes to say that
complete thought aloud, and how much time you have, mid-match, to make
such a decision. Maybe we can convert this to a single word,
"HHTBCSIGTRTBDTL" (pronounced "huhut bik sig trot b'dittle"). Maybe this
can shorten the time to say it somewhat, but it still kind of takes a
long time.

In Computing, there's this idea of
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bandwidth_(computing)][Bandwidth]],
which put simply is the amount of information possible to transfer over
some medium in a given amount of time. Consider the bandwidth of the
English Language - in the amount of time you have to react to Kazama's
attack, how much information can you process with words?

With the power of science, we've actually managed to demonstrate that
when you think or read words in your head, you actually make movements
in your larynx to form those words. This silent speech, or
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subvocalization][subvocalization]], is
just how we manage our thoughts most of the time. It's a good part of
how we store things in short-term working memory, via the
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baddeley%27s_model_of_working_memory][phonological
loop]].

This whole idea of "purposelessness" I think becomes quite a bit easier
to understand with this knowledge. Thinking *words* during your actions
means that you have a buffer zone in between your perception and your
action. Your thoughts should come in the form of whatever action you're
performing, your inner "language" should be in entire actions of your
skill. English doesn't have the information density to allow you to use
it for these highly specialized tasks.

As such, your thoughts when processing information quickly can't be in
English, due to subvocalization. You don't have time to think "Cross
court left? I'll do a drive here" because by the time you get to "left"
the entire action has already completed.

Daisetz uses swordsmanship to concisely illustrate this idea: "The
secrets of perfect swordsmanship consist in creating a certain frame or
structure of mentality which is made always ready to respond instantly,
that is, immediately, to what comes from the outside. While technical
training is of great importance, it is after all something artificially,
consciously, calculatingly added and acquired. Unless the mind that
avails itself of the technical skill somehow attunes itself to a state
of the utmost fluidity or mobility, anything acquired or superimposed
lacks spontaneity of natural growth." (ZITAOA pp.37)

In this way "conscious thought" is the enemy of your goal simply because
with any degree of mastery your thoughts should not be in words but in
actions. You should literally think in the language of your task, and
let the decisions come to you rather than forcing things in this way.

Put another way, "Zen is not necessarily against words, but it is well
aware of the fact that they are always liable to detach themselves from
realities and turn into conceptions. And this conceptualization is what
Zen is against... Zen insists on handling the thing itself and not an
empty abstraction." (ZAJC, pp. 28). On a surface level, just think about
the idea of "Forehand": it's a word that doesn't really refer to a
single thing. We move around in three dimensions, and the conception of
"Forehand" is just a broad class of things close enough to the same to
refer to as a single category. But there are many possible forehands,
with many possible paths, and thinking about it with language you're
presented with this problem: Do you come up with a different word for
each possible forehand (at the cost of coming up with countless words)
or do you create broader categories at the cost of imprecision? Zen
sidesteps this by sidestepping language altogether. "Zen Verbalism
expresses the most concrete experience" (pp.28).

This, I think, is a lot of the non-mystic-mysticism that is everywhere
in Zen -- it's not so much that you can /know something unknowable/, as
that would be literally impossible. But rather that you come to know
something that cannot be precisely described by language. Zen deals with
the elements of consciousness that cannot simply be taught but must be
/shown/, which is why it's usually referred to in the language of
"Training" rather than "Teaching". /Satori/, or Enlightenment, "must be
the outgrowth of one's inner life and not a verbal implantation brought
from the outside" (ZAJC pp.33). It's obvious how this can be applied to
sport, or any physical skill - You cannot be enlightened by Zen through
words any more than you can be taught proper running form by reading
instructions.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"You can't learn this from watching it. It's not like a math test."
(ep.11)
#+END_QUOTE

[[../images/ppta/mathtest.png]]

In this way I think a lot of people misinterpret Zen as being
anti-intellectual or anti-science, but I don't think under this lens it
shares any of the same qualities with
[[http://rationalwiki.org/wiki/Woo][Woo]]. Zen is less of a religion and
more of a /technique/ used to view things "directly" (insofar as our
senses would allow), rather than making them pass through a conscious
reality-mapping process. "If you want to see, see right at once. When
you begin to think, you miss the point" (zajc pp.36).

** The Art of Ping Pong
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-art-of-ping-pong
    :END:

As an exploration of this sort, you notice throughout the story that
different characters "get it" to different degrees, struggle with
different things, and overall have pretty different experiences that all
lead them down various paths. Almost all of the characters struggle with
a different specific philosophical idea, and their stories are each
reflective of overcoming that obstacle.

I think the easiest way to explain this is to explore each character
individually, and, essentially, walk through the story several times
through the eyes of each of them.

** The Hero as the Quest for Enlightenment
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-hero-as-the-quest-for-enlightenment
    :END:

Peco's journey is the most straightforward, and is the easiest to grasp
from a philosophical perspective. Peco is on the quest for
enlightenment, and the concept of "the hero" represents enlightenment
itself. The parallels between this "hero" and /satori/ are
self-suggesting: the emphasis on chanting (/Hero Kenzan/), the hero
"saving" Smile from the harsh world, etc.

Peco is the character with the most dramatic character development of
all the characters, going from a relatively weak and obnoxious braggart
to a focused, passionate player among the best in the world. As such,
you get to clearly see his entire journey from start to finish - a
journey illustrative of a wide sampling of concepts in East Asian
philosophy.

*** Unknown Unknowns
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: unknown-unknowns
     :END:

I'm going to ask a question that may have not occurred to you when you
watched Ping Pong for the first time. Rewatch the scene where Peco plays
Kong for the first time:

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
<iframe width="1020" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/V1WjozwcRqI" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
#+END_EXPORT

Ask yourself the following:

"What did Peco do wrong?"

It's an interesting question, in hindsight. It's clear enough why he
lost - Kong is in a league of his own and just completely and utterly
outclasses Peco. But ask yourself what he really /did wrong/ in this
scene and it starts to become a little hazy. Peco correctly identifies
everything that Kong is doing to defeat him, and tries to adapt to them
after literally every point. Peco is paying attention, he's playing
seriously, he's /thinking/, and more than anything else he seems to be
demonstrating that he's actually a pretty decent player. Most people
just watch this scene and think something along the lines of "Peco
realizes that he sucks at Ping Pong" but that, I think, sort of misses
the point.

Notice, specifically, that everything Peco does is narrated, out loud,
to himself. All of his observations, all of his decisions, all of his
/predictions/ are said, literally, in his head as complete sentences
(notice especially him dragging out the sentence "4000-year special" to
be in sync with his actual swing, which ends up missing horribly).

A much more extreme example of this is the Beach Guy, who plays against
Smile (ep 3). He writes out a plan, fully detailed, with a discrete
endpoint where he simply doesn't have any idea what to do afterwards,
and once he gets to that point he crumbles and starts thinking about how
gloomy the world is. This sort of subvocalization is almost always an
easy cue for someone in PPTA playing absolutely terrible, pretty much
exclusively happening to the losing party (Peco vs Kong, Beach guy vs
Smile, Kong vs Kazama, Sakuma vs Smile, even Kazama vs Peco). It's easy
to point at Beach Guy and laugh at the absurdity of his actions, but his
actions aren't much different from Peco's -- they're just presented in a
more funny way.

*** Kenshou
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: kenshou
     :END:

The beginning of PPTA, from Peco's perspective, is essentially his
delusional self-obsession slowly but surely getting farther and farther
from reality, going from a brazenly overconfident self-proclaimed ping
pong prodigy to on the precipice of quitting the sport after losing to
the guy who got crushed by Smile (as if that had any bearing on his
value as a player).

When Peco dramatically snaps out of his delusions, he takes what ends up
being a remarkably straight path towards mastery of the sport. Peco was
on the verge of quitting table tennis forever, even after Sakuma saves
his life and tells him not to quit. He is like this up until he sees the
old picture of Smile, leading to an outburst where he shouts to Obaba

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"Teach me the game from the beginning!"
#+END_QUOTE

From this point forwards Peco becomes the embodiment of Beginner's Mind,
or [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shoshin][/Shoshin/]]. He shows up to
the training center [[../images/ppta/basics.png][wearing shoes with the
word "Basics" on them]] and ends up completely discarding his old
habits, completely adopting a new style. Adjectives commonly attached to
Shoshin seem to fit Peco quite well - "openness, eagerness, and lack of
preconceptions when studying a subject, even at the advanced level."
(wikipedia).

This part of the story serves as Peco's awakening. He hasn't quite
reached enlightenment - he's no better at ping pong now than he was
moments before, after all. But he's seen the path he needs to take, he's
experienced this
"[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kensh%C5%8D][Kenshou]]", literally
"seeing essence". He's not yet a master, but he's started walking on the
path that will let him slowly and consistently accumulate bits and
pieces of masterness.

*** Satori
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: satori
     :END:

You see him slowly build up to it, but during his match with Kazama,
Peco finally reaches his Enlightenment once and for all. At the start,
it seems like Peco is going to be destroyed in straight sets. At the
start of the third set Peco's coach says

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"Don't think, Peco; you don't have the brains for it." 

"...You know better." 

"That's not your game."
#+END_QUOTE

[[../images/ppta/dontthink.png]] [[../images/ppta/notgame.png]]

As we already know: when you begin to think, you miss the point. In the
first two sets you get a simple illustration of Peco's forced, boxed-in
conceptualization of the game through his thoughts. He can't see an
opening through his explained-out mental version of the game, and he
starts winning as soon as he abandons that in favor of just moving fast
and doing what comes naturally. He enters what Japanese martial artists
refer to as
"[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mushin_(mental_state)][Mushin]]" (or,
"no mind"), in which he is able to move free from fear, ego, and
judgement. "At this point, a person relies not on what they think should
be the next move, but what is their trained natural reaction (or
instinct) or what is felt intuitively."
([[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mushin_(mental_state)][wikipedia]]).

He's physically drawn differently, a white blur who looks almost
floating moreso than running, enraptured in the kinesthetic sensation of
the /now/. He stops thinking, he stops trying to win, and he places
himself squarely in the present moment which allows him to completely
turn the game around.

[[../images/ppta/blur.png]]
[[../images/ppta/wings.png]]

Notice the wing/cape-like paper on his back

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"The hero transcends logic. The hero overturns what we thought we knew,
and drives away the darkness. More than anything, he shines simply,
brightly, and happily."
#+END_QUOTE

The finale between Smile and Peco seems almost out of place with regards
to how the actual match is treated, relative to the other matches in the
show. The score is a non-factor, and half of the match is replaced with
a series of each character's childhoods to music with the lyrics "we are
all alive". The match is completely colored white, as if nothing else
even exists at all, both of their focus so tuned into the match that the
entire world literally fades away. Smile seems to be smiling in every
shot, everybody watching is enraptured, and Peco gets to show everyone
how much he loves table tennis.

[[../images/ppta/nothingness.png]]

** The Enlightened Roomba, and The Dreaming Butterfly
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-enlightened-roomba-and-the-dreaming-butterfly
    :END:

Smile is the character that reaches their apex earliest in the show, and
starts out as the most talented. He initially struggles with his
fondness for Peco, which ended up being a serious limit placed on his
development, as he became much stronger than Peco and needed to pull his
punches to "be like him."

[[../images/ppta/pecomitai.png]]

Smile is aided from the beginning by Koizumi, a former pro table tennis
player nicknamed "Butterfly Joe". This is not subtle symbolism, and
leads us straight towards the
/[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhuangzi_(book)][Zhuangzi]]/, a
founding text of Daoism (which would later influence Chan, or "Zen",
Buddhism). The most famous story of the Zhuangzi is the Butterfly Dream,
where Zhuang has a dream that he is a butterfly so vivid that when he
awakens he is unsure if he is a man that dreamt of being a butterfly, or
a butterfly dreaming of being a man. Butterflies are everywhere in PPTA,
almost exclusively surrounding this part of the story,
[[../images/ppta/butterfly1.png][follow]] either
[[../images/ppta/butterfly2.png][Smile]] or
[[../images/ppta/butterfly3.png][Koizumi]] wherever they
[[../images/ppta/butterfly4.png][go]].

Indeed, Smile and Koizumi's struggle is a Daoist one more than a Zen
one, and a number of Smile's difficulty mirror themes present in Daoist
texts.

This is a lot of the reason Smile clashes so hard with the Ping Pong
world - it's not super compatible with his philosophy in general. Daoism
teaches accepting death ("Ping Pong is just a way to kill time until I
die"), distance from social obligation (Smile's specialty), and
effortless action, or "Wu Wei", which entails acting without purposeful
striving for gain. Hard to do in a zero-sum game like Table Tennis.

One of the more obvious tells to the link between philosophy and Koizumi
is his match with Smile, where he forces Smile to abandon his
reservation and really push himself. He's overjoyed that Smile finally
understands, and in a moment of self-reflection says "You do not chase
the ball, the ball chases you." This is so emblematic of East Asian
philosophy that it's almost cliche - Herrigel in /Zen in the Art of
Archery/ mentions at one point "I learned to lose myself so effortlessly
in the breathing that I sometimes had the feeling that I myself was not
breathing but, strange as this may sound, was being breathed" (ZITAOA
p.20). This is a reflection of the wordlessness mentioned earlier -
having the trained response take over, to be able to control yourself
without instructing your body with verbal signals, and to be so focused
that it's almost mysterious-feeling where the instructions are coming
from at all.

Another big theme in Daoism is "Wandering" or /You/, which is the virtue
of wandering through life, enjoying it without purpose, and not overly
attached to any part of it. This is a huge, HUGE theme in Smile's story,
since from the start he tries to achieve this by becoming "a robot".

Smile's interaction with Peco (and by extension, the hero) are usually
expressed through "the hero's theme", which is a plot point (Smile hums
it to himself sometimes). You can see pockets of Smile's ultimate
destination, and they're usually associated with this song. The most
salient example of this is during his match with Kong (ep. 3), where he
starts singing the hero's theme and just utterly crushes Kong,
wordlessly and naturally. He gets pulled out of this dramatically when
Kong's coach yells about Kong never returning home, Smile begins to pull
his punches, and the soundtrack takes itself elsewhere. You'll notice,
though, that this is /almost/ the same scene as Peco vs Kazama in
episode 10 - Smile goes down early, the soundtrack switches to the
Hero's Theme, and Smile starts playing phenomenally well. The thing that
separates these two matches is the ending - Peco stays focused through
to the end whereas Smile allows the outside world to pull him away from
his mindfulness.

His enlightenment finally comes when he breaks free from this robotic
shell and is permitted to wander through life as a feeling, breathing
human. You'll notice that even his racket becomes a "part" of him, as if
his veins themselves flow into it.

[[../images/ppta/human.png]] [[../images/ppta/racket.png]]

An important plot point is found in the lines used to break him out of
pulling punches and to break him out of the robotic shell. When he plays
Koizumi, the inner robot in him says "Blow him away", and at the end
when he breaks out of the robot and emerges as a living being, he hears
Peco say the same thing

[[../images/ppta/blowhimaway.png]] [[../images/ppta/blowhimaway2.png]]

Near the end, you see the video game Smile's been playing abandoned on
the stairs he was sitting on - he doesn't need the fake version of the
hero vs robot story any longer, since Peco's awakening allows him to
finally experience it himself.

[[../images/ppta/game.png]]

** The Past, the Future, and the Chinese National Team
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-past-the-future-and-the-chinese-national-team
    :END:

Kong's struggle during the story is one of fear and subverted
expectations. Having been spirited away from the Chinese national team,
his entire world is transformed to an obsession with winning enough
overseas to return home. In a sense, the way Kong acts around Table
Tennis is similar to the way you might imagine someone acting after a
particularly bad breakup; always profoundly negative,
nostalgia-obsessed, highly anxious, and completely unable to focus.

[[../images/ppta/hell.png]]

Interesting to note here is Kong's character design - he's loosely based
upon two Chinese table tennis players,
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kong_Linghui][Kong Linghui]] and
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ma_Wenge][Ma Wenge]]. The choice of
players is no accident. The name "Wenge", or 文革, literally means
"[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cultural_Revolution][Cultural
Revolution]]", a period in Chinese history where the country underwent
enormous setbacks by trying and ultimately failing to achieve success in
an extremely narrow way (namely, "grassroots socialism"), which mirrors
Kong Wenge's struggle to return to China. Kong Linghui's relevance is
more literal - Linghui was sent during his youth to Sweden, in order to
learn the European style of table tennis. After spending time in Europe,
he returned to China and within three years became the world rank number
one, becoming the third player to ever achieve a career grand slam
(winning at the Olympics, the World Cup, and the World Championships).
The name "Kong Wenge" serves as foreshadowing for his entire character
arc - his struggles to adapt to a new culture, his frantic attempt to
succeed in a highly specific way, his training away from his homeland,
and his eventual success at the Olympics. All just from his name!

As time passes, you notice Kong begin to get more and more attached to
his work in Japan. He gets better and better at teaching the other
players at his school, and they begin to respect him more after
initially treating him as a spectacle. However, Japan is always just a
side-gig for Kong - he's always got his return trip home in the back of
his mind, almost exclusively thinking about it during nearly every
single match. It's not even that Kong can't focus on table tennis - he
can't focus on /the present/ at all, his thoughts are consumed by his
homesickness.

When he plays Peco in his final match of the show, you notice him
finally accept his situation once and for all. The story is not subtle
about this -- it show's Kong's coach, "CHINA" written proudly on his
back, walking away...

[[../images/ppta/coach.png]]

...Silence. A softly colored memory of his mother opening a door, with
the words "Finally... You've come home" superimposed...

[[../images/ppta/home.png]]

Then a sharp sound, and a jarring jump cut to a white, bouncing ping
pong ball, with the word "JAPAN" in starkly contrasting black.

[[../images/ppta/japan.png]]

He accepts it, after all this time - Japan is his home now. The image of
a plane that has been following him around everywhere takes off and
fades into reality, leaving behind a smiling Kong and a victorious Peco.

[[../images/ppta/plane.png]]

In the epilogue, it's found that Kong manages to find great success,
having been naturalized and selected to play for Japan in the Olympics.
Once he abandoned his anxieties about his past, he was able to overcome
them and allow success to come to him in a more straightforward way.
Kong was wrapped up in a specific /type/ of success: win in Japan,
return home, make the Chinese national team. Once he accepted his
current situation, he was able to travel the path of success that was
available to him, rather than trying to "win" with such a narrow
definition of things that count as "winning" at all.

[[../images/ppta/tsujido.png]]

** The Talentless Ping Pong Ronin
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-talentless-ping-pong-ronin
    :END:

Sakuma is a particularly puzzling character, one that was hard for the
western audience to really grasp super well. I think a lot of this has
to do with the cultural association of Sakuma (and, more broadly, with
Kaiou) with the samurai that was mostly lost in the west.

Sakuma's entire world revolves around table tennis, and his attitude
towards his team holds some remarkable similarities to
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bushido][/Bushido/]], the Samurai way of
life. This is no more apparent than when he travels to play Smile, and
he has a short conversation with Koizumi:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"They're like the
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shinsengumi][Shinsengumi]]. You don't
have [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kond%C5%8D_Isami][Kondou Isami's]]
permission?"

"I didn't even tell
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hijikata_Toshiz%C5%8D][Hijikata]] I was
coming."

"So you're prepared to commit
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seppuku][seppuku]]."
#+END_QUOTE

Sakuma's character relies heavily upon the cultural icon of /Samurai/,
and the virtues typically associated with them. Sakuma is heavily
invested in Kaiou, and his relationship with the other players on his
team is a fiercely loyal one - Sanada and the others typically come to
his defense, whereas Kazama is typically indifferent towards him. He
reveres Kazama and works constantly to be better at table tennis,
unrelentingly dedicated at all times.

Despite this, Sakuma seems fated to "die", as it were, from the start,
and his story plays with the ideas of shame and honorable suicide, both
strongly associated with the Samurai. Tsunetomo talks briefly about this
in /Hagakure/, where he outlines his thoughts on bushido and claims that
"the way of the warrior is death," - that Samurai should be prepared to
die at any moment, in order to be truly loyal to their lord. Imagery
surrounding Sakuma seems to suggest that he shares a similar belief
about table tennis and Kaiou academy - when he leaves to challenge Smile
he's drawn as a Samurai, with the
/[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z47Xt6M7m50][Kotsuzumi]]/ playing in
the background, an instrument typically associated with Kabuki.

[[../images/ppta/ronin.jpg]]

When Sanada tries to talk to Kazama about him, Sanada makes an offhand
comment: "He's the type that would play with appendicitis. The posters
he has in his room ain't funny to me."

[[../images/ppta/posters.png]]

The poster that's shown is of
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K%C5%8Dkichi_Tsuburaya][Koukichi
Tsuburaya]], a Japanese Marathoner that killed himself four years after
being passed in the final stretch of the Olympics, injured and
[[http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2053776,00.html][unable
to live with the shame]]. They found his body clutching his bronze
medal. The poster in his room of this athlete is disturbing to Sanada,
and serves as a cue that Sakuma is "prepared to die" for table tennis.

And indeed he does - when Kazama says that Kaiou needs "players on the
level of Tsukimoto of Katase", he's more or less denouncing Sakuma,
who's assumed to be one of the weaker players of Kaiou due to his lack
of natural talent. Kazama even instructs Sakuma to help recruit Smile,
saying "next year will be hard if I'm the only good player on the team"
(directly telling Sakuma he is not a good player). From Sakuma's
perspective, Smile joining Kaiou would mean him being removed anyways,
so he goes to Katase more or less to seek an honorable death in battle.

After getting kicked off the team, Sakuma simply goes on with his life
in a new direction, and seems to find a lot of happiness with it by the
end of the story. He finds a way through life that doesn't involve
competition and as such can see table tennis for what it is, rather than
what he wants it to be.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"It let me see clearly, too." 

"See clearly?" 

"Sights you can only see when competition's not a factor."
#+END_QUOTE

[[../images/ppta/competition.png]]

Sakuma ends up perfectly happy by the end of the story, but it leaves a
bad taste in a lot of viewers' mouths because his happiness doesn't come
from success at table tennis whatsoever. He still gets to play whenever
he feels like it, with a style better suited to him, but Sakuma's life
after getting kicked off the team is one with no space for playing table
tennis in competitions.

It clashes with the typical feel-good narratives of most other sports
anime, where nearly every character in every show eventually finds some
degree of success. Sakuma, in contrast, actually fails, just like
everyone in PPTA does at one point or another. But Sakuma ultimately
finds happiness outside of the game altogether - happiness that is just
as real as Peco's or Kong's.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"Not all birds can fly."
#+END_QUOTE

[[../images/ppta/birds.png]]

** Life, Death, and Poseidon
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: life-death-and-poseidon
    :END:

In terms of Ping Pong The Animation's art style, Kazama's entire
existence is /literally/ colorless. You'll notice that things around
Kazama are almost always either black, white, or purple, the former two
usually functioning as emptiness and the latter usually being the focus
of the shot. Kazama's playstyle, and his entire narrative, is one that
revolves around blackness, emptiness, /soullessness/. Everything is
exaggerated, dramatic, and for lack of a better word /scary/. Why might
Kazama's art direction clash so heavily with the other characters'?

[[../images/ppta/bakemono.png]] [[../images/ppta/black.png]]
[[../images/ppta/dark.png]] [[../images/ppta/anger.png]]

Kazama's character is fundamentally tied to the idea of life vs death,
and in this sense Kazama is the "heaviest" character with the most
serious issues surrounding him. It's heavily implied that Kazama's
father killed himself due to failures in his business, and Kazama's
philosophy surrounding Ping Pong are grounded in this fear of failure
that, quite literally, took his father's life away from him. This, too,
is not very subtle. The phrase "Defeat is Death" is repeated more than
once, surrounding only Kazama's narrative.

[[../images/ppta/defdeath1.png]]

Kazama's attitude towards winning is, therefore, one completely and
utterly devoid of joy. This contrasts so strongly with Smile's
haphazard, almost uninterested attitude towards winning and losing, and
the two clash early on in the story (claiming that the other's
philosophy disgusts them). Kazama's fear of defeat, and by extension
fear of death, are so all-consuming that the entire experience is
"nothing but pain for him".

[[../images/ppta/pain.png]]

This ends up being something that Kazama overcomes, allowing him to
truly enjoy the game, being able to accept defeat without anxiety.
Herrigel speaks a bit about this in /Zen in the Art of Archery/, saying
"Years of unceasing meditation have taught [the swordmaster] that life
and death are at bottom the same and belong to the same stratum of fact.
He no longer knows what fear of life and terror of death are. He lives -
and this is thoroughly characteristic of Zen - happily enough in the
world, but ready at any time to quit it without being in the least
disturbed by the thought of death" (p.58). With this in mind, Kazama's
match with Peco in Episode 10 become more consistent with abandoning
this fear, with the match turning from his own reaffirmation about the
terror of defeat to his becoming enraptured with the joy of being.

Specifically, you see it happen extremely gradually with the color
scheme in every frame becoming further and further from the typical
darkness surrounding Kazama's matches, until it's nothing but white
dominating the entire shot

[[../images/ppta/pecostarts.png]]
[[../images/ppta/breakthrough.png]]

Notice the white breaking through the black here

[[../images/ppta/set3.png]]
[[../images/ppta/joy.png]]

much less black here

[[../images/ppta/fly.png]] [[../images/ppta/white.png]]

The art is used to express the slow, dramatic emotional transformation
that happens as the set progresses, and by the end of it Kazama is the
happiest he's ever been playing table tennis.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"All of my cells are singing with joy." 

"My focus blocks out the outside
world." 

"I don't have time to be afraid." 

"I feel no anxiety. I like
this place. It's glorious."

#+END_QUOTE

** Conclusion
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: conclusion
    :END:

If this were not a story with intentional reference to entire
disciplines of East Asian philosophy, then it's a wonderful vehicle for
exploring them anyways, and this writing should serve as praise both for
the applicability of the philosophical concepts and for the raw /truth/
captured in the story of Ping Pong The Animation.

There are ideas to be learned from each character's unique struggles,
and becoming overly attached to any one character should strike you as
weirdly antithetical to the point of the whole show. We should seek to
see ourselves in Peco, a person dedicated to the pursuit of enlightened
mastery. We should seek to see ourselves in Smile, a person now able to
wander through life, appreciating the world, blood flowing through their
veins. We should seek to see ourselves in Kong, accepting ourselves and
our environment. In Kazama, an abandoning of the fear of defeat and
loss. In Sakuma, an acknowledgement of where we belong. All of their
struggles should feel familiar to us, and all their destinations feel
achievable by us.

Anyone with experience competing at things could probably relate to
almost every emotion portrayed by all the characters in this show. Some
characters resonate with certain people more strongly, but only insofar
as much as those emotions dominate their lives. The great thing about
Ping Pong is how profoundly relatable it is, how really /right/ they
captured the experience of competition.

We are all the characters, all at once. And we are all alive.

*** Misc Notes, errata
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: misc-notes-errata
     :END:

Note that I am not at all an expert in East Asian philosophy in any
capacity, nor am I the most experienced critic (I merely read a few
books on Zen and saw parallels with this show that I really liked). If I
got anything very wrong about Zen, Daoism, or anything else
philosophical, feel free to tell me! I'll list corrections in this
section along with your desired name to credit (or anonymously, if you
would prefer).

Things left to do:

-  Read more in general about Zen / Daoism in general
-  Read the source material for PPTA (that is, the manga)
-  Look for interviews with PPTA's director and Ping Pong's mangaka
-  Flesh out some of the weaker sections
-  Get more screenshots where appropriate
-  Maybe rewatch this a few more times to keep finding details that I
   missed

** References
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: references
    :END:

-  Ping Pong: The Animation
-  Zen in the Art of Archery
-  Zen and Japanese Culture

/posted on 5/2/2017/\\
