* Projects
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: projects
   :END:

/Updated: 9/21/2020/

The bulk of the content on this website contains what I consider to be
larger projects of mine, scattered around a number of different topics.
It's difficult to organize them well based on a simple list, so I'll
periodically update this as a rough list as I accrue more and more
projects to add to it.

Most of my projects are in some way adjacent to the
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jX9hbbA-WP4][Super Smash Brothers
Melee]] community, since involving myself there is what I spend most of
my free time on. Aside from finding the game itself super fun, I've
found the community to be a great source of inspiration for interesting
problems to solve.

--------------
** [[https://cogsci.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/Thesis2017Banatt.pdf][Input Latency Detection in Expert-Level Gamers]]

[[./images/misc/latency.PNG]]

My *Cognitive Science Senior Thesis at Yale University* was a visuomotor
perception experiment in which I exposed tournament-level SSBM players
(including some top-100 world-ranked players) to precisely timed flashes
of light using an arduino microcontroller in order to test their ability
to blindly determine the presence of input lag compared to a control
group. SSBM tournament matches are all held on CRT Televisions, since
even the fastest LCD monitors necessarily add delay in between your
input and the picture being displayed, effectively slowing down your
reaction time. This has led to certain players to claim they could
notice input lag, even at single-digit-millisecond levels. This
experiment found a large and significant difference in perceptual
ability between tournament-level gamers and a control group, and
suggested the existence of such a perceptual effect to be somewhat
plausible.
--------------
** [[http://planetbanatt.net/articles/ambistats.html][Making Sense of Melee: The Illusion of Objective Ranks and the Real Impact of Everything]]

[[./images/ambistats/winrates_good.png]]

Aside from academic work, I've also done some statistics and data
visualization work within the Melee Community. The most prominent of
these is /Making Sense of Melee/ - a longform statistics writeup in
which I explore a variety of topics, including flaws in popular ranking
algorithms, the accuracy of seeding at national tournaments (a topic I
was
[[http://www.espn.com/esports/story/_/id/20580441/smash-bros-seeding-not-secretive-suspected][interviewed
by ESPN esports]] about in 2017), and probabilities to win against
players at differing skill levels. The post received more than 50,000
hits, reaching [[https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=16255910][#6 on
Hacker News]].

--------------
** [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DFg_7DcXwBlk&ab_channel%3DMeleeStats][Plup vs Prince Abu - The Weirdest Set Ever Played]]

[[../images/misc/thumbnail.png]]

You will occasionally see my name in longform video content, also,
where I am probably most known for this video about one of my favorite
sets of Super Smash Brothers Melee. The video currently has over
250,000 views on YouTube at the time of writing, and kickstarted [[https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCSkemv_CrepoaGxN4sAH5eA][our
channel]], which now has over 10,000 subscribers, making content like
this more frequently

--------------
** [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3Dz8llYT7KGdI&ab_channel%3DMeleeStats][Michael vs Bananas - The Only Reason We Play Melee]]

[[../images/misc/thumbnail_2.png]]

A co-project I did with my good friend [[https://twitter.com/gimmedatwheat?lang%3Den][GimmeDatWheat]]. This particular
set is very famous for the fact that in game 2 neither player played
the game at all. We decided it would be good to make a video about the
construct of community-defined rules in competitive gaming, and about
why people like playing this game at all in the first place.

--------------
** [[http://planetbanatt.net/articles/visualdistance.html][Locating Visual Jokes in Homestuck with Rudimentary Computer Vision]] 

[[./images/homestuck/opening.png]]

I try to cluster together visually similar panels in Andrew Hussie's
webcomic [[https://www.homestuck.com/info-story][Homestuck]] using relatively basic Computer Vision
techniques. Project explores Hamming Distance, Edge Detection,
Perceptual Hashing, K-Means Clustering, Graph Theory, Community
Detection, etc. I end up finding a bunch of panels that are redraws of
each other. A bit long-winded, since it has my entire problem solving
process (failures included) but a pretty cool project of mine.

--------------
** [[http://planetbanatt.net/articles/personainsmash.html][Predicting Personality with Playstyle in Super Smash Brothers]]
 
[[./images/personality/extraversion_cool.png]]

To get to the bottom of the very common hypothesis that playstyle in
Super Smash Brothers correlates in some meaningful way with
personality, I conducted an informal survey which administered a Big
Five Personality test alongside questions about in-game variables like
playstyle or character. After 1754 participants (!) completed the
survey, I found a modest but significant relationship between some
factors and playstyle question responses.

--------------
** [[http://planetbanatt.net/articles/hitbox.html][GameCube Controllers in the Era of SmashBox]]

[[./images/smashbox/results2.JPG]]

In which I wired tact switches to precise analog values on a GameCube
controller to emulate
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UM-NKXS1m2I][SmashBox]] functionality
without sacrificing analog control or previously built muscle memory.
The video I made for this project proved extremely controversial,
amassing 10,000 views on
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zwwc0HjXd1k][YouTube]] and over 200
comments on
[[https://www.reddit.com/r/SSBM/comments/5jur1w/gamecube_controllers_in_the_era_of_smashbox/][Reddit]].

--------------
** [[http://planetbanatt.net/articles/health.html][Optimizing Health with Cronometer]]

[[./images/health/weightloss_1_2017.png]]

Chronicles my 40-lb weight loss near the end of my undergraduate life.
To accomplish this goal (which took only a few months), I read a number
of papers in nutritional science, synthesized a game plan, and measured
every single piece of food I ate for several months to assess the
validity of my approach. I tracked my food intake using
[[https://cronometer.com/][Cronometer]] and adhered to a calorie
counting regime for a short while, and at the end made some charts based
upon my weight over time and the foods I ate. In the end I lost weight
at a constant rate, with the linear regression's R-squared resulting a
staggering 0.98, despite not adhering to any specific macronutrient
balance.

--------------
** [[http://planetbanatt.net/articles/groundwork_for_projection_algorithm.html][SSBM Bracket Projection Algorithm]]

[[./images/projection/radar.png]]

2015 project in which I use past data to write a simple machine learning
classifier to predict wins and losses at SSBM tournaments, and
outperform basic seed1 > seed2 projections done by smash.gg.

--------------
** [[http://planetbanatt.net/articles/pingpongzen.html][Zen in the Art of Ping Pong The Animation]]

[[./images/ppta/fly.png]]

I analyze Zen themes in the storylines of cult classic sports anime
[[http://www.crunchyroll.com/ping-pong-the-animation][Ping Pong The
Animation]]. If you're more about my empirical projects, this might not
be quite up your alley. However, if you've seen the show I'm confident
this essay will shed some interesting perspective on it, and if you
haven't seen the show then I'm confident you're missing out on one of
the best pieces of media ever made.

--------------
** [[http://planetbanatt.net/articles/potbonus.html][Do Pot Bonuses Affect Entrant Numbers at Melee Tournaments?]]

[[./images/potbonus/boxplot_small.png]]

Short writeup on pot bonuses at major tournaments, and their effect on
attendance. I use attendance and prize pool data from 60 large
tournaments between 2015-2017 and use a number of correlational tests
and visualizations in R, ultimately finding no relationship between pot
size and major tournament attendance.

--------------
** Violin Plots for KayBeats' [[https://www.reddit.com/r/SSBM/comments/7rbxeg/assessing_west_coast_bias_on_ssbmrank_and_why_it/]["West Coast Bias in SSBMRank, and Why it Doesn't Exist"]]


#+BEGIN_HTML
<img src="https://i.imgur.com/TmuMCHd.png"></img>
#+END_HTML

KayB is a Melee Stats denizen, and he wrote a post exploring the
supposed "West Coast Bias" in the SSBMRank panel. I collaborated with
him by generating [[https://imgur.com/a/jUfST][Violin Plots]] (boxplots
with kernel density plots overlayed on top of them) of the top 100
ballots, graciously provided by Tafokints.

--------------

Some smaller projects and writings of mine are scattered around this
website, since I use this website as a sort of journal / garage /
desk-with-papers-scattered-all-over it. You can find more about me over
at the [[http://planetbanatt.net/about.html][About]] page, you can find
my Resume [[http://planetbanatt.net/resume.pdf][Here]], and you can keep
up with what I'm up to over at the
[[http://planetbanatt.net/links.html][Links]] page.

And, as always, more to come soon!
